---
layout: post
title:  "Signal"
description: Cutting through Signal/Noise Ratio.
tags: Communications E2EE Messaging
---

# Signal Messenger

At the time of this writing, one of the quickest and easiest ways to step up your daily OpSec is to replace your phone's built in text messaging app with [Signal.](https://www.signal.org/)

Signal is an End to End Encrypted messaging app. It's free to download and use - the Signal Foundation is a `501c3 nonprofit` and the code is [Open Source.](https://github.com/signalapp). 

In order to take full advantage of Signal's security features, your other contacts will need to use Signal as well. As we briefly touched on while covering [Encryption](link) Signal's encryption method is End-to-End. This means that each message is encrypted and decrypted on the devices themselves, ensuring plain text messages never travel over the air. IF a message is intercepted - Signal has built-in mechanisms to alert you. You can rest easy knowing that the observer is only able to see encrypted cipher text, and not your precious Vogaan Poetry.

Your phone's default text messaging is in *no way* private or secure. Your messages can be intercepted by any number of devices that are designed to mimic your Cell Carrier's own Cellphone Towers, copy the traffic for later viewing, and pass it along to it's original destination. Your built-in messenger app has no way to detect this, and depending on which app you're using could be specifically designed to mask this behavior from you.

Voice and Video calls are included, and also E2EE. Group-Chats, and Voice Memos are also included. Gif attachments, quick photo editing, 

Some Advanced features of Signal include:
	
	* Self Destructing Messages  
	* Encrypted Message Backups
	* Screen Locking
	* Registration Locking
	* New Device Notifications for Contacts  
	* Incognito Keyboard
	* "Out of Band" fingerprint passphrases